ENH: random: Add the method `permuted` to Generator. (#15121)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/reference/random/generator.rst

Permutations
============

The methods `Generator.shuffle`, `Generator.permutation` and
`Generator.permuted` are used for randomly permuting an input array.
The following describes the important differences among these methods.

In-place vs. copy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The main difference between `Generator.shuffle` and `Generator.permutation`
is that `Generator.shuffle` operates in-place, while `Generator.permutation`
returns a copy.

By default, `Generator.permuted` returns a copy.  To operate in-place with
`Generator.permuted`, pass the same array as the first argument *and* as
the value of the ``out`` parameter.  For example,

    >>> x
    array([[ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4],
           [ 5,  6,  7,  8,  9],
           [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])
    >>> y = rg.permuted(x, axis=1, out=x)
    >>> x
    array([[ 1,  0,  2,  4,  3],  # random
           [ 6,  7,  8,  9,  5],

>            [10, 14, 11, 13, 12]])

Reviewer: These examples fail doctests: `x` and `rg` are not defined. Personally I think I perfer to lead with the table rather than put it at the end, but it is hard to see without rendered docs.

Author: Thanks @mattip, I like the suggestion to move the table to the top.  I'll make that change in my next update.

Author: > That still allows the compiler to optimize based on knowing that itemsize is sizeof(npy_intp)?

From Sebastian and from some further reading: yes, gcc can, in fact, replace a `memcpy` call with inline code.

Author: I updated the docs.

two-dimensional array, ``axis=0`` will, in effect, rearrange the rows of the
array, and  ``axis=1`` will rearrange the columns.  For example

    >>> rg = np.random.default_rng()
    >>> x = np.arange(0, 15).reshape(3, 5)
    >>> x
    array([[ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4],
           [ 5,  6,  7,  8,  9],
           [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])
    >>> rg.permutation(x, axis=1)
    array([[ 0,  1,  4,  3,  2],  # random
           [ 5,  6,  9,  8,  7],
           [10, 11, 14, 13, 12]])

Note that the columns have been rearranged "in bulk": the values within
each column have not changed.

The method `Generator.permuted` treats the ``axis`` parameter similar to
how `numpy.sort` treats it.  Each slice along the given axis is shuffled
independently of the others.  Compare the following example of the use of
`Generator.permuted` to the above example of `Generator.permutation`:

    >>> rg.permuted(x, axis=1)
    array([[ 1,  0,  2,  4,  3],  # random
           [ 5,  7,  6,  9,  8],
           [10, 14, 12, 13, 11]])

In this example, the values within each row (i.e. the values along
``axis=1``) have been shuffled independently.  This is not a "bulk"
shuffle of the columns.

In-place vs. copy

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: This should be the moved up, the `axis` difference is secondary.

Reviewer: Add a table summarizing this lengthy description or some other kind of TL;DR summary: 
method | copy/inplace | axis handling
--- | --- | ---
shuffle  | inplace | as-if 1d
permutation | copy | as-if 1d
permute | either copy or inplace | axis independent

Reviewer 2: Also perhaps worth noting that `shuffle` works on non-numpy sequences.

> The main difference between `Generator.shuffle` and `Generator.permutation`
> is that `Generator.shuffle` operates in-place, while `Generator.permutation`
> returns a copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only difference between `Generator.shuffle` and `Generator.permutation`
is that `Generator.shuffle` operates in-place, while `Generator.permutation`
returns a copy. These are legacy APIs and cannot be easily changed.
```

Author: It isn't actually the only difference, since `permutation` also has the feature that passing in an integer `n` results in a permutation of `arange(n)`.   And while I understand the comment about not changing the APIs, is it useful to have such a comment *here*?

Reviewer: ok, so ignore this.
